--- 
layout:  post 
title:   "EVF: An Extensible and Expressive Visitor Framework for Programming Language Reuse"
authors:  "Weixin"
date:     2017-06-14 10:00:00 +0800
venue:   "CB 313"
categories: Weixin 2017
--- 
## Abstract

Object Algebras are a design pattern that enables extensibility,
modularity, and
reuse in mainstream object-oriented languages such as Java. The theoretical
foundations of Object Algebras are rooted on Church encodings of datatypes,
which are in turn closely related to folds in functional programming.
Unfortunately, it is well-known that certain programs are difficult to
write and
may incur performance penalties when using Church-encodings/folds. This
paper
presents EVF: an extensible and expressive Java Visitor framework. The
visitors
supported by EVF generalize Object Algebras and enable writing programs
using a
generally recursive style rather than folds. The use of such generally
recursive
style enables users to more naturally write programs, which would otherwise
require contrived workarounds using a fold-like structure. EVF visitors
retain
the type-safe extensibility of Object Algebras. The key advance in EVF is a
novel technique to support modular external visitors. Modular external
visitors
are able to control traversals with direct access to the data structure
being
traversed, allowing dependent operations to be defined modularly without the
need of advanced type system features. To make EVF practical, the framework
employs annotations to automatically generate large amounts of boilerplate
code
related to visitors and traversals. To illustrate the applicability of EVF
we
conduct a case study, which refactors a large number of non-modular
interpreters
from the “Types and Programming Languages” (TAPL) book. Using EVF we are
able to
create a modular software product line (SPL) of the TAPL interpreters,
enabling
sharing of large portions of code and features. The TAPL software product
line
contains several modular operations, which would be non-trivial to define
with
standard Object Algebras.


