--- 
layout:  post 
title:   Two more talks
authors: Marco Servetto
date:    2024-1-18 14:00:00 +0800
venue:   CB328
--- 


### Enforcing Modular Security through Language Design: A Study on Object and Reference Capabilities


We present an approach to language design aimed at enforcing
modular security, where a security architect can define specific
object capabilities that enforce custom security properties. Unlike
traditional models that assume an uncompromised system (‘clean
garden’), this model (‘dark forest’) assumes local machines are
already compromised but anchored by a secure root. Security is
maintained even in the presence of adversarial code execution within
security-critical processes: a process may be rendered inert, or be
subjected to crashes or infinite loops, but it is precluded from
engaging in insecure interactions.


### The Fearless Journey

Existing minimal OO models, like Featherweight Java (FJ),
are valuable as a base for designing new programming languages.
However, their utility in developing real-world programs is limited.
We introduce the `Fearless Heart’, a novel object calculus preserving
FJ’s minimal and extensible nature while being more suited for
constructing complex, real-world applications.
To illustrate the extensibility of the Fearless Heart, we extend it
with Reference Capabilities (RC), creating R-Fearless. It supports
mutability and other side effects while retaining the reasoning
advantages of functional programming and gaining support for features
that are well-known to be enabled by RC, like automatic parallelism,
caching and invariants. R-Fearless is still minimal enough to allow
further extensions.